GUIDE TO FUTURE CUSTOM MCP PLUGINS
Project lessons and official guidance checked 9 October 2026.

1. Decide what belongs together
A human website, an MCP server and a ChatGPT plugin connection have separate
lifecycle steps. The website provides an editor. The server exposes operations
ChatGPT can call directly. The connection imports that server's tool metadata.
Publishing the website does not deploy the server or refresh a user's connection.
The Render administration plugin in Codex is separate from Maths Booklet Tools,
which is the diagram plugin used by ChatGPT conversations.

For another diagram tool with the same ownership, public access and bounded
rendering model, consider adding named tools to the existing service/connection.
Graph and ratio tools demonstrate this pattern. A new service or connection may
be appropriate when ownership, authentication or access boundaries differ, or
when an intentional migration is required. A new name does not fix a schema.

Keep the human editor usable independently of the MCP service. Both should use
a shared core for document validation, exact maths, layout and exports. Define
explicit blank states, version saved documents, preserve unrelated content on
revision, and require an explicit operation to fill a pupil's answer. MCP tools
should return usable results even without the website UI.

2. Design a clear and bounded tool contract
Use specific names and descriptions explaining when to call each tool, supported
inputs, defaults, limitations and what is returned. Separate capability discovery,
creation and revision where this makes the contract clearer. Make annotations
accurately describe side effects, external access and repeated-call behaviour.
Validate inputs in handlers; metadata alone does not enforce resource limits.

Return structured results: a versioned editable document, revision hash, preview,
actual file downloads, physical dimensions and an editor link where supported.
Keep useful descriptions and actionable errors. Do not fabricate links, silently
change mathematical values, or describe a successful render as proof that a
ChatGPT conversation used it. Use bounded fallback files when links are too long.

Inspect the emitted input AND output JSON Schemas from actual MCP tools/list,
including nested saved documents, defaults, unions and revision operations.
Reading TypeScript or Zod source alone is insufficient: an SDK's translation
may expose a representation the target client rejects.

For identical cell/heading types in two positions, this project uses:
  z.array(cellSchema).length(2)
This advertises an object-valued items schema with minItems/maxItems 2. Do not
reintroduce z.tuple([cellSchema, cellSchema]) here; that emitted positional items
and caused the documented ChatGPT import failure. Retain exact length and cell
validation. See MCP-SCHEMA-INCIDENT-2026-10-09.txt for the diagnosis and limits of
this conclusion. Do not assume every union is unsupported or weaken validation
until registration passes. Qualify SDK/schema changes against the real client.

Official tool/schema/annotation guidance:
https://developers.openai.com/plugins/build/mcp-server

3. Verify each layer with separate evidence
Local checks: validate mathematical behaviour, blank preservation, invalid inputs,
revision atomicity, document compatibility and export bytes. Reuse shared tests
and add meaningful cases for the change. For this repository run, as appropriate:
  npm run lint
  npm test
  npm run typecheck
  npm run build
  npm run build:service
  npm run test:e2e

Protocol checks: use the MCP SDK or Inspector to discover actual tool schemas and
call creation/revision through the same transport clients use. Verify input and
output schemas, error handling and downloads. The existing discovery guard and
six-tool smoke provide a starting point, not a universal ChatGPT validator.

Deployment qualification: run required Linux CI and the Docker smoke with the
Free instance's 512 MiB memory constraint. Windows success does not prove native
fonts/rendering or container behaviour on Linux. Use synthetic test keys and
isolated containers; do not export or rotate the production signing key for tests.

Production checks: compare /healthz buildId with the qualified build, discover
tools, make affected calls and download the actual PNG/SVG/JSON. The built smoke
accepts a service base URL:
  node service-dist/smoke.js https://maths-booklet-graph-mcp.onrender.com
Run deliberately within service limits. Verify graph regression when extending
the shared service, and confirm the editor route/fonts/round trip separately.

ChatGPT checks: refresh/import the connection, confirm the expected actions and
test in a NEW conversation with the plugin selected. Check the actual returned
files and editable link; a model's unsupported-tool explanation or prose claim
is not a tool receipt. Record what Tim tested separately from automated checks.
If Word output matters, insert/copy a real image into Word and check its size and
sharpness; browser raster metadata does not prove Word's behaviour.

Do not collapse these stages into "working": code written, tests passed, merged,
deployed, tools discovered, ChatGPT call accepted and Word trial are distinct.
For documentation-only edits, verify content/links/diffs; runtime requalification
or a Render redeployment is unnecessary unless runtime inputs also change.

4. Diagnose rejection from the response
When ChatGPT gives a generic app-settings banner, find the failed request in the
browser's Network panel and read its Response JSON. Retain the status, error type,
error code, message and named tool. Headers and unrelated console warnings may
not explain the failure. A normal browser GET to /mcp is also not a protocol test:
this server uses stateless Streamable HTTP POST and can return 405 to GET.

Do not paste Authorization headers, cookies, tokens, signed downloads or an
unredacted HAR into documentation or Trello. Use synthetic diagram examples.
Distinguish unreachable/cold service, authentication failure, invalid schema,
metadata refresh and tool execution errors using the actual evidence. Address
the reported cause before changing identity, auth mode, host, keys or CSP.

For mcp_validation naming a tool, inspect its complete emitted schema and shared
references, add a focused regression, repair the representation while retaining
semantics, then rerun affected discovery and invalid-input checks. SDK success
alone did not prevent the 9 October ratio-table import failure.

5. Release an update to an existing custom connection
a. Review the final source and required checks through the project's PR process.
   Preserve unrelated agents' work; do not merge another task to change status.
b. Check the ACTUAL hosting repository, branch, Dockerfile and deployment settings.
   Our existing service used codex/chatgpt-graph-integration with manual deployment;
   a push to main or another branch did not automatically update that service.
c. Deploy the exact qualified source through the authorised release path. Record
   the commit, workflow, deployment ID, buildId and live HTTPS check. A code push
   is not proof of deployment. Preserve the stable URL and compatible contracts.
d. In ChatGPT Plugins, open the ORIGINAL connection and use Refresh. Confirm the
   new tools, then open a new conversation, select the plugin and test it.
e. Create a replacement only for a deliberate migration or a diagnosed connection
   problem. Do not keep adding differently named copies to work around rejection.
   Remove an obsolete duplicate only when authorised; Tim removed ours himself.
f. Record the account trial and remaining review/Word actions. Keep a rollback
   route that preserves editable documents and signing-key compatibility.

Current endpoint: https://maths-booklet-graph-mcp.onrender.com/mcp
Health endpoint: https://maths-booklet-graph-mcp.onrender.com/healthz
Human ratio editor: https://tboughen.github.io/maths-booklet-tools/?tool=ratio-table
Connection steps and acceptance prompts: GRAPH-MCP-CONNECTION.txt
Official custom connection/refresh guidance:
https://developers.openai.com/plugins/deploy/connect-chatgpt

6. Keep the free/public design intentional
This renderer makes no OpenAI model API calls and requires no OpenAI API key.
The human website remains browser-based; graphs and ratios share one Free Render
service. Free hosting can sleep and delay calls. Waking /healthz then retrying is
useful for a cold service, but cannot repair an invalid schema. Do not add paid
instances, another service or a periodic keep-awake job as a schema workaround.

No authentication is appropriate for this intentionally public bounded renderer;
do not copy that setting into plugins exposing private account data or privileged
actions. Preserve input/output/queue/time limits and validate host/origin access.
Keep logs to operational metadata, and retain real error responses without
credentials or document bodies. Follow GRAPH-MCP-FREE-SETUP.txt and
GRAPH-MCP-RUNBOOK.txt for the current deployment and privacy limits.

7. Treat public publication as a separate step
A private custom MCP connection is not a publicly submitted plugin. If a future
plugin is packaged, update its metadata/instructions/examples and version using
the relevant plugin workflow, then test that package as well as the server.
Public submission adds listing, permission and review requirements. Published
tool definitions are subject to review; a running server with new tools does not
guarantee that all published users immediately receive those tools. Plan for
compatible changes and verify the distribution path actually being used.
Official publication/review guidance:
https://developers.openai.com/plugins/deploy/app-review

Example ratio acceptance prompts
  "Use Maths Booklet Tools to make headings x right and y up, rows (4,8) and
   (1,blank answer line). Return the PNG and editable website link."
  "Move to a worked (2,4)/(1,2) table with divide-by-two arrows on both sides."
  "Revise the first table's size while keeping the student's answer blank."
Check actual tool calls, correct drawings/files and the independent editor link.
Retest a graph and an unsupported request. Record only cases actually tried.
