CHATGPT MCP IMPORT INCIDENT — 9 OCTOBER 2026

Outcome
The original Maths Booklet Tools plugin now exposes graph and ratio-table tools.
Tim refreshed that connection and reported that the ratio-table test succeeded.
He subsequently removed the temporary Maths Booklet Tools Updated plugin.
One Render service and one ChatGPT connection are sufficient for these tools.

The solution was a server schema correction followed by refreshing the original
connection. A different plugin name, endpoint or hosting service was unnecessary.

Symptoms and decisive evidence
The website ratio editor worked, and direct MCP SDK discovery returned all six
tools. Direct creation, revision and export checks also passed. However, the
original ChatGPT connection still listed only Create graph, Graph capabilities
and Revise graph. A conversation therefore could not use the ratio-table tools.

Creating a temporary connection at the same /mcp URL failed with this banner:
"Some app settings were rejected. Check the server URL or tunnel ID, icon, and
authentication settings, then try again."

That banner did not identify the failing field. HTTP 400 response headers alone
also did not explain it. The failed request's JSON response supplied the cause:

{
  "detail": {
    "type": "apps_sdk_error",
    "error_code": "mcp_validation",
    "message": "Invalid MCP tool schema for tool 'create_ratio_table'"
  }
}

Browser console warnings about Content Security Policy were not evidence of the
MCP schema failure. The response identified a tool validation problem; it did
not establish that reusing the original endpoint was forbidden. No credentials,
cookies or full browser network capture are needed to retain this diagnosis.

Schema correction
Both cells and headings are exactly two entries of the same respective type.
In packages/ratio-table-core/src/schema.ts they previously used Zod tuples:

  export const cellsSchema = z.tuple([cellSchema, cellSchema]);
  export const headingsSchema = z.tuple([headingSchema, headingSchema]);

The SDK emitted draft-07 positional array schemas with this shape:

  { "type": "array", "items": [CELL_SCHEMA, CELL_SCHEMA],
    "minItems": 2, "maxItems": 2, "additionalItems": false }

The correction uses homogeneous arrays with an exact length constraint:

  export const cellsSchema = z.array(cellSchema).length(2);
  export const headingsSchema = z.array(headingSchema).length(2);

The advertised shape is now:

  { "type": "array", "items": CELL_SCHEMA,
    "minItems": 2, "maxItems": 2 }

CELL_SCHEMA is a placeholder for the actual cell schema, not executable JSON.
The same change applies to headings. Shared definitions update creation,
revision envelopes, add_row, set_headings and returned document schemas.
Saved documents still contain two entries. Invalid lengths are still rejected;
the numeric, empty and answer-line cell variants retain their validation.
The fix neither fills student answers nor changes rendering or arithmetic.

This is the compatibility repair verified for this service and ChatGPT import.
The error named the tool, not the exact nested property. Positional arrays can
be valid JSON Schema in the appropriate dialect; do not claim they are invalid
everywhere. Likewise, this incident does not justify banning every oneOf union:
the already working graph schemas use unions. Test the emitted schema in the
actual target client rather than assuming all valid JSON Schema is accepted.

Verification and deployment
services/graph-mcp/ratio-table.test.ts now inspects real MCP tools/list results
for all six input and output schemas. The project guard checks object-valued
array items, absence of positional array constructs, and exact-two constraints
on cells and headings. Actual MCP calls also reject invalid lengths on creation
and revision, and malformed cell states. This guard covers the known regression;
it is not a complete implementation of ChatGPT's schema validator.

The fix passed lint, type checking, builds and 116 tests. Linux CI additionally
passed 14 browser tests and the six-tool Docker smoke at a 512 MiB memory limit.
The live HTTPS check found zero positional tuple occurrences, down from ten,
preserved answer lines, and verified graph and ratio creation/revision/exports.
The simple ratio preview was byte-for-byte identical before and after the fix.

Recorded release evidence:
  Repository: https://github.com/tboughen/maths-booklet-tools
  Fix commit: e4a0882ec04f78f4849dc89a8e7f1fbfa29180ef
  Review PR: https://github.com/tboughen/maths-booklet-tools/pull/3
  Linux CI: https://github.com/tboughen/maths-booklet-tools/actions/runs/37886205626
  Render service: srv-db2mfjaj9qps73eo05a0
  Render deployment: dep-db4797u0tbcc73dcvrbg
  Deployment live: 9 October 2026, 05:00:04 UTC
  Qualified/live buildId:
    64d5054475706b597d4caa3ad8fface51a821f9d9595c390c72686615db0a4cc

The existing Render service deployed the corrected commit from its configured
codex/chatgpt-graph-integration branch. The URL, Free plan and signing key were
retained. No second service or OpenAI model API dependency was added.
At the incident handover PR 3 remained open: deployment of the reviewed fix is
distinct from merging it into main. Consult the PR for later source status.

Account acceptance
After deployment, Tim refreshed the ORIGINAL Maths Booklet Tools connection.
The requested trial was the simple (4,8)/(1,answer-line) table with a PNG and
editable website link. Tim reported:
  "I refreshed - it now shows on the original plugin. Test succeeded too"

This is human-reported ChatGPT account acceptance, beyond the direct SDK tests.
It does not establish every future prompt or native Word insertion behaviour.
The temporary Updated plugin was then removed by Tim. No further deployment
was needed for that cleanup or for writing this documentation.

Lessons for the next change
Inspect the JSON schemas actually advertised through tools/list. Qualify the
server locally and on its deployment platform, then test import and a real call
in ChatGPT early. A successful SDK call does not prove client import acceptance.
Deploy the correction first, refresh the existing connection, confirm its tools,
then test in a new conversation. Read the failed network response before making
another plugin or changing authentication, hosting, browser policy or keys.

Related project guidance
  MCP-PLUGIN-DEVELOPMENT.txt — future design, testing and release procedure
  GRAPH-MCP-CONNECTION.txt — current connection and acceptance steps
  RATIO-TABLE-MCP.txt — ratio schema, operations and deployment checks

Official refresh procedure, checked 9 October 2026:
https://developers.openai.com/plugins/deploy/connect-chatgpt
